---
layout: post
comments: true
title: Simple Made Easy 
date: 2018-05-23 11:20:00
description: Striving for simplicity   
--- 

I watched Rich Hickey's talk on [Simple Made Easy](https://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy) 
and he discusses why simplicity matters in software and what it 
means to create simple systems. I thought this talk was rather interesting in 
the way he dives deep into the meaning of simplicity and easiness in regards to software. 

I tend to think of "simple" as being synonymous with easy. 
What's easy for me is not necessarily easy for others and vice 
versa. For this reason, I strive not to use either of these 
words. 

However, Rich talks about the origins of the word "simple". The 
roots of "simple" are "sim" and "plex" meaning "one twist". The 
opposite of this word would be complex which is "multiple 
twists" or "braided". 

He goes on to say that simple things are focused and they
do not address multiple issues. Simple things have one role, 
they fulfill one task, and they have one objective. My 
first thought was this sounds like the Single 
Responsibility Principle! I believe the theme of SRP
shines through strongly throughout his talk but he goes
beyond SRP by talking about constructs. More on that later. 

Easiness, on the other hand, implies "nearness"; something
that can be obtained easily or near to our understanding. 
When someone explains a concept and says "Well, its easy!". 
What they are implying is that the concept is near to **their** 
understanding and they're familiar with it. 


While it may seem straightforward and implied - simplicity in 
software matters. Choosing easiness is a common path. Easiness
allows you to move faster in the beginning but Rich argues that 
this will cause accumulated complexity over time which kills 
projects. Remember, that easy is near to our understanding. Easy 
things can definitely be complex (like state and syntax); its 
incidental complexity. 


If on the other hand, we choose simplicity from the beginning we 
may move slower but this pays off as time goes on. 


So what's complex? It's something that interleaves and braids 
together. It's the opposite of simple. Rich Hickey suggests some 
core entities that are considered complex (because they are
intertwined) in software: 

* State - everything it touches
* Objects - state, identity, value
* Syntax - meaning and order
* Inheritance - types
* Variables - value, time
* Imperative loops - what/who
* Actors - what/who 
* ORM - self explanatory

Interesting!! If you start to think about the definitions of 
simple and complex, these listed items are actually complex and 
also very likely easy! Take state for example - that's easy! But 
its considered complex because in one way or another it ends up 
touching other things. 

But, now you're probably thinking "If these are complex, what's 
left? What's simple?!" At least that was my first reaction. It 
does seem, however, that several items on the following list seem
more specific to some FP languages but I don't think Rich Hickey
is suggesting simplicity is only achievable with FP but its 
apparent that FP is favored. 

* Values - use final, persistent collections 
* Functions - use stateless methods
* Namespaces 
* Data - Use maps, arrays, sets, XML, JSON
* Polymorphism ala carte - through Clojure protocols and Haskell type classes 
* Managed refs - available in Clojure and Haskell 
* Set functions 
* Queues
* Declarative data manipulation - SQL, LINQ, Datalog 


The main idea is that if you use more simpler tools, you can 
focus on the system and in turn write better systems. In a way, 
Rich Hickey is taking SRP to a complete different level. Instead
of taking things at face value in your preferred language, reach
for constructs that are simple. It's important to note that 
simplicity does not correlate with "less". Rich Hickey argues
that simplicity will often mean creating more things which
isn't a bad thing. 

Choosing simpler constructs is the first step. The second step
to simpler systems is to use abstraction. He suggests asking what, 
who, when, where, why and how for abstraction. 

* What - What do we want to accomplish? Use constructs available 
(i.e. interfaces in Java). Give them names and ensure they're 
small (no large interfaces!). At this point, avoid thinking 
about the how. 

* Who - Define the data or entities the abstraction will use. 
Avoid getting into the details of any subcomponents and don't 
complicate an entity with the details of another entity. In 
other words, create boundaries! See what I did there? 

* How - This is about the implementation details. Rich suggests 
using polymorphism and isolating implementation details as much 
as possible. 

* Why - This about the policy and rules of the application. 


I think this is an interesting way to build and design systems. 
I'm often guilty of taking things at face value. I'm definitely 
guilty of reaching for what's easy - I think many people could 
probably agree with that however. It seems many (not all) of 
these principles would be more appropriate for a functional 
language considering that Rich Hickey suggests that Objects in 
themselves are complex so that put an OO language in a tough 
spot. 

This definitely makes me think of things and decisions I've made 
in different ways. I've only thought about simplicity and 
complexity in terms of large entities like the way I've composed 
objects for instance and I haven't thought about it at a more 
granular level. I think this will take some practice and getting 
out of "auto-pilot", for a lack of better words, but it seems 
rather essential to building simpler systems. 
