---
layout: post
comments: true
title: SOLID&#58; Open-Closed Principle
date: 2018-01-17 12:40:00
description: Discussing OCP
---

The definition for Open-Closed Principle (OCP) is as follows:
> Software entities (classes, modules, functions, etc.) should be open for extension and closed for modification.

If OCP is applied properly, further changes or features are achieved by adding new code, not modifying code that already works.

_Open for extension_ means that as requirements change we can **extend** the module with **new** behaviors that satisfy the change or feature.

_Closed for modification_ means that extending the behavior of a module does not result in changes to the source code of the module.

So, how can we add new features without changing the code? Let's take a look at TTT `Board` class and first violate the Open-Closed Principle. We need to implement a traditional 3x3 board. An implementation might look something like this.

```java

public class Board {
  // ..
  private String[][] rows() {
      String[][] rows = new String[3][3];
      int index = 0;
        for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
          for (int n = 0; n < 3; n++) {
            rows[i][n] = grid[index];
            index++;
          }
        }
      return rows;
    }

  //..
  // other methods for getting columns, etc.

}

```


A few weeks down the road, we get a request that our customers would also like to be able to play a 4x4 board. Yikes. In order to implement the new feature we would need to alter or *modify* the existing code to support the new feature.

On the other hand, had we applied OCP this would be rather easy. Let's refactor our code to adhere to OCP.



```java
public class Board() {
  private int boardSize;

  public Board(int boardSize) {
    this.boardSize = boardSize;
  }

  //..

  private String[][] rows() {
      String[][] rows = new String[boardSize][boardSize];
      int index = 0;
        for (int i = 0; i < boardSize; i++) {
          for (int n = 0; n < boardSize; n++) {
            rows[i][n] = grid[index];
            index++;
          }
        }
      return rows;
    }

    //..
}

```


By abstracting the board size information into an instance variable and referencing the `boardSize` in our functions instead of hard coding it, our code is now much more flexible. We can instantiate our board with `4` and be able to support a 4x4 board, or any size for that matter.

Another common violation of OCP is when you might want to perform a particular action depending on the type of object you're dealing with. It's often accompanied by an `if/else` statement. I'm going to come up with a different example other than the classic example of calculating the area of different shapes. Say we have an application where we keep track of different animals and their sounds. We need to be able to print those sounds (i.e. bark, meow, etc). Right now our customer wants us handle the implementation for dogs and cats.



```java
public class AnimalSounds {
  //..
  public void makeSound(String input) {
    if (input == "cat") {
      System.out.println("Meow!");
    } else {
      System.out.println("Woof!")
    }
  }
}
```


Okay, that seems manageable. But wait, now our customer wants us to implement the sounds that can be heard in the Amazon Jungle. Uh oh. We would have to return to our `makeSounds` function and add (many) more `else if` branches. Our code is not closed for modification. Let's refactor it using an interface.  

_Note: If you aren't familiar with Java interfaces check out a recent post I wrote on [interfaces](https://www.karakelley.me/2018/01/11/title.html)._


```java
public interface AnimalSound {
  void makeSound();
}

public class DogSound implements AnimalSound {
  public void makeSound() {
    System.out.println("Bark!");
  }
}

public class CatSound implements AnimalSound {
  public void makeSound() {
    System.out.println("Meow!");
  }
}
```


While this example may seem extreme or silly the idea is that our refactored code is now open for extension and is closed for modification. When (not if) our customer wants to add new animal sounds we can have new animals implement the `AnimalSound` interface. This would also allow us to have a collection of instances that implement `AnimalSounds`, iterate through them and call `makeSound()` on each one without having to worry what type of animal we are dealing with.


Abstraction is a key mechanism for applying OCP. The best way to *close* your code for modification is to create abstractions similar to the way we abstracted the board size information. Try to ask yourself what would need to change if new features needed to be implemented. If you find yourself thinking of an if/else branch or modifying your existing code you may not be adhering to the Open-Closed Principle.
